>> I'm Richard Dolan
and this is False Flags.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As I discussed in our previous
episode of this series,
false flags are a specific
tool of state propaganda
and manipulation
designed to achieve
ends that would otherwise
be impossible to justify.
I explained what elements
they often contain,
as well as why, in my
view, they are specifically
modern phenomenon.
That might seem strange to you.
After all, weren't people in the
ancient world just as cunning
and deceptive, and every
bit as power hungry,
as people of today?
And the answer to that
is, yes, they often were.
But the ancient
world has left us
scant evidence of false
flags, certainly in the way
we understand them today.
Now it may be that there were
false flags we will never
know about, secret
operations that
were so successful that
they evaded any suspicion
and were never detected.
Sure, that's possible.
But the fact remains that
the available evidence
gives us very little to go on.
There does not
even appear to have
been a great deal of
suspicion of false flags
for the vast majority
of the ancient world.
Even so, there are indeed a few
events of our earlier history
that do look like false flags,
or at least very possible
false flags.
And they are definitely
worth our investigation.
As you will see, what
is so interesting
about them is not
necessarily how similar they
were to false flags of
today, although a few of them
were, but really, how
very different they were.
Very different.
By looking at these early
forms of false flags,
I would say we begin to gain
a better understanding of how
this phenomenon, one of the
worst forms of manipulation
and deception in our world,
has developed and evolved
over time.
Let's start with ancient Rome.
Whenever you do hear people
talking about false flags
as an ancient
phenomenon, you often
hear them refer to the
burning of Rome in 64 AD.
A massive fire began on
the night of July 18th,
and burned out of
control for five days.
Nearly one third of Rome
was burned to the ground,
and much more was
severely damaged.
There are several ancient
sources of the great fire,
and unfortunately none of
them are primary sources.
And only one qualifies
as a secondary account.
In other words, not ideal.
Even so, historians feel that
they have a pretty good handle
on the events, if not perfect.
It appears that
Emperor Nero wanted
to build a series
of palaces, which
he plan to name Domus Aurea.
This structure would have
required a large part of Rome
to be torn down, and the
Senate rejected the idea.
Then, luckily for Nero, the
fire cleared much of the area
that his project required.
People knew of Nero's
plans for the Domus Aurea,
and as a result, rumors
spread that he helped
to start the fire, either
by openly sending men out
to do the job, or by
secretly sending them
out where they
pretended to be drunk
and then set fire to the city.
If you read what
modern historians have
to say about this, they
generally discount the idea.
Most seem to rely on the
most prestigious historian
of ancient Rome, named
Tacitus, and agree with him
that Nero was probably
in the city of Antium,
about 30 miles south of Rome,
when the fire broke out.
Keep in mind that fire
was a constant menace
in ancient cities.
In addition, the great fire
also damaged Nero's own palace,
and he appears to have
rushed back from Antium
to organize a relief effort.
He opened his palaces
to let in the homeless,
and had food supplies
delivered to survivors.
It's also said that
in the aftermath,
Nero devised a new
urban development
plan that would make Rome
less vulnerable to fire.
He also, however, gave
himself a huge tract
of city property with
the intention of building
his new palace there.
So, with Rome rife with rumors
that Nero caused the fire,
it does certainly appear
that Nero found a scapegoat.
This was the new religious
cult of Christianity, members
of which met in secret,
refused to worship the emperor,
and looked forward to
the end of the world
and the destruction
of Rome's power.
Conservative patriotic Romans
looked at these Christians
as something like terrorists.
Tacitus tells us that
Nero blamed the fire
on the Christians, and
then to appease the public,
or feed his own
bloodlust, who knows,
he had them literally fed to
lions in massive spectacles.
Like so many events
in ancient history,
we will never have
complete information
about the great fire of Rome.
That's just the reality
of the situation.
We can imagine, even
after 2000 years,
that Nero might have
played a role in it.
After all, Tacitus, while a
great historian, and probably
the most reliable voice of that
period, was simply one source.
So we really will never know.
If you think of the elements
that go into a false flag,
as I discussed in our
very first episode,
you'll find that the great
fire has a few of them,
but certainly not all.
It was a spectacular
and traumatic event.
And while there was no real
media to speak of back then,
it is true that Nero seemed,
quickly and conveniently,
to blame the Christians.
The government also took very
decisive and immediate action.
And Nero certainly did
benefit from the fire.
However, what we lack is all the
important series of anomalies
and inconsistencies.
There is, in fact, no
evidence that has ever been
offered, not even a little.
The best we can say is that
Nero might have been behind it.
On the other hand
fires were very common
in the ancient world.
I think the best guess is
that the great fire was
a case of what we can call
state opportunism, in which
a convenient victim
was offered up
as a sacrifice for the
benefit of powerful interests.
Not quite a false flag,
but certainly a case
of government treachery.
Now lets look at
the Inquisition.
The Inquisition lasted for
several centuries in Europe.
It was a major extended
effort by the Catholic church
to maintain orthodoxy in a time
when more and more people began
to question elements
of church dogma.
After all, we're talking
about the Renaissance,
the age of world
exploration, the beginnings
of true scientific inquiry.
Clearly you're going to get
new ideas entering the world,
and that's disruptive
for a hierarchy that
existed through what can only
be described as mind control.
So in this context,
in the year 1487,
a very interesting
book was published.
This was the "Malleus
Maleficarum."
Its title means, the
hammer of witches.
It was really nothing
other than a guide book
on how to identify, hunt
down, and kill witches.
It was extremely
influential, and was
the cause of a great
amount of human suffering.
But it was quite effective for
the purposes of the church.
You create a fake
enemy, witches.
Oh my god, witches,
in our neighborhood.
What are they doing here?
Someone has to
protect the children.
So you terrify the
public about witches.
But there is a solution.
Kill the witches.
Or rather, find them, and
bring them to the church.
The church will
take care of them.
No worries, people.
We will keep you safe
from the witches.
A great benefit for the
church in all of this
was the money that it made.
First, through what were
known as indulgences.
That is, if one of your
family members was a witch,
you would pay the church money.
This could possibly reduce the
sentence, if not in this life,
then it could help you keep your
wife or daughter out of hell
and just give her a few thousand
years of nasty purgatory.
And oh yes, the other thing the
church was very good at doing
was taking the land of
families of witches.
The Inquisition helped the
church maintain its supremacy
over the minds of people
in an era of rapid change,
development of scientific ideas,
and exploration of new lands.
You keep them
terrified of witches
and running to the
church for protection.
Not a bad strategy.
Not good for the
people, but you can
see why the church
thought it was awesome.
It's estimated, by the way, that
over 1 million European women
died as a result
of the Inquisition.
>> By shifting the burdens of
that terror into other people,
by making and
constructing otherness,
by constructing scapegoats,
in this case witches, or Jews,
or lepers, who we
can, in a sense,
blame for the terrible
difficulties of our daily
existence, from the
catastrophes of history.
>> Now I want to talk a little
bit about the famous Gunpowder
Plot.
The 5th of November, known
in Britain as Guy Fawkes Day,
commemorates the events of
that day from the year 1605,
known to history as
the Gunpowder Plot,
or the Gunpowder Treason.
England had been going through
its version of the Protestant
Reformation, but there
was still strong support
in the country for Catholicism.
Many Catholics were still
living in the country.
So there was definite
religious tension.
According to the official
version of events,
a small group of
conspirators planned
to assassinate King James
I, who was a Protestant,
and to restore a Catholic
king to the throne.
The plotters gained
access to a space
beneath the House of Lords,
and one of these people
was named Guy Fawkes.
Fawkes was a major voice for
the rights of English Catholics
at that time.
Everyone described him as very
intelligent, very capable,
and as a good person.
Everyone liked Guy Fawkes.
He was put in charge of the
gunpowder that was stockpiled
under the House of Lords.
And remember, gunpowder
in 1605 was not
something you would
see every day.
Yes, there were
guns and cannons,
but there were still
many, many swords as well.
Gunpowder was a very
advanced substance,
and the most powerful explosive
available at that time.
So then came an anonymous
letter to the authorities,
warning them of the plot.
Soldiers from the king
searched Westminster Palace
during the early
hours of November 5th.
There they found Guy Fawkes
guarding the explosives.
He also had a
pocket watch, which
was quite rare at
the time, presumably
to time his actions
according to the plan.
Well, Fawkes was tortured,
and he confessed to treason.
The whole event was played up
as the salvation of the country.
After all, if the
plot had succeeded,
King James and the queen
would have been dead,
along with the members
of the House of Lords
and the House of Commons.
Not surprisingly, the
exposure of the plot
became a national
holiday in the UK.
But there is a
deeper story to all
of this, which has
sometimes been called
an English equivalent of 9/11.
There are suspicious oddities
about the whole affair.
Researchers have argued
that Fawkes was not
captured in a basement room
as the official story went.
Instead, it was said that
he was on a ground floor
room, which the plotters had
easily been able to rent.
The anonymous letter, well,
we don't know who wrote it,
but we do know who had
it and who used it.
That was the royal
chancellor, Sir Robert Cecil,
the Earl of Salisbury.
This was one of the most
scheming politicians
of the age, and a leading
member of the group
known as the War Party.
They wanted a war with
Spain, and therefore
the chance to make
a huge profit.
Cecil was a bit like a man
who would appear much later
in history, J Edgar Hoover.
He ran many spies inside the
Catholic dissident community.
He was in a position to
know pretty much everything
worth knowing.
Regarding the
gunpowder plot, Cecil
told the nothing
except for the contents
of the anonymous letter.
In other words, he kept very
close control over information.
Interesting.
Another interesting thing is
that, even though Guy Fawkes
knew a lot about explosives,
the gunpowder found on the scene
was not very impressive.
It was low quality gunpowder.
Today it seems
impossible that even
good quality gun powder could
have done any real damage.
And what they found, hardly
at all, it would seem.
And we also have a statement
from a Jesuit historian
at the time, a man
named John Gerard.
This wasn't published
for 300 years.
Only in 1897 did it come out.
Now Gerard was
obviously pro-Catholic,
but the main thing
is that he offered
a very different, and
we have to say logical,
interpretation of November 5th.
He wrote, quote,
"When we examine
into the details supplied
to us as to the progress
of the affair, we find that much
of what the conspirators are
said to have done is
well nigh incredible.
While it is utterly
impossible that if they really
acted in the manner described,
the public authorities
should not have had
full knowledge."
Gerard was essentially saying,
if this so-called plot were
true, then we are looking at
the dumbest plotters in history.
He was skeptical,
to say the least.
Now, King James himself was
not particularly anti-Catholic.
Most of his advisors had told
him the Catholics in England
were nearly all loyal.
And there certainly
was no indication
that any Catholic nation had
anything to do with the plot.
But we do know that
Sir Robert Cecil, who
seemed to be pulling
many strings on this,
did want war with Spain,
and did take a hardline view
against Catholics.
So, immediately after
the plot was revealed,
England's churches,
the main avenue
of state propaganda at the time,
spun the story to the nation.
The evil Catholics had
tried to kill the king
and destroy England.
Catholics became seen as
the terrorists of their day,
and persecution
against them increased.
It also led to a
long period of war
between Protestant England
and Catholic Spain.
Like most of the events
of early history,
we will never know
with certainty
all the details of
the Gunpowder Plot,
but it's fair to suggest that
Sir Cecil and the War Party
either made it happen, or else
allowed the plot to take place,
knowing it would play
into their hands.
This seems very much like
later operations of agent
provocateurs, in which
people are unwittingly
coaxed and cajoled
into attempting
terroristic activity, then
nabbed in order to perpetrate
the need for authority.
Now we turn to the pirates.
It's from these
fellows of history
that we actually get
the phrase false flag.
Professional historians
tell us false flags were not
uncommon during the
Golden Age of Piracy,
the 17th and 18th centuries.
During that time, pirates who
roamed the world seas would
sometimes catch
their victims off
guard by using the flags
of a friendly nation.
It was the simplest
way to capture
an unsuspecting merchant vessel.
Before Morse code or
electronic signaling,
the only way a ship
could be identified
was by the flag it carried.
By the end of the 17th
century, national flag designs
were well known, and pirates
often collected them.
British pirates
were known sometimes
to fly the Union Jack when
it suited their purposes.
You would think
that, from a group
of people whose activities
are the cause of the phrase
false flag, that we would
have many false flag
stories from them.
But in fact, we have
only a small handful
of specific examples
of pirate false flags.
We're pretty sure they
did a number of them,
but the details are
generally lost to us.
Most of them seem to date
from the early 1700s.
One prominent pirate,
Bartholomew Roberts,
flew Dutch flags and
emulated Dutch signals
when he captured 14 French
sloops, which came to meet him,
with a lot of money on
board, thinking they
would purchase slaves from him.
In 1723, he performed
a classic false flag
when he encountered
a Spanish merchant
ship in the Bay of Honduras.
According to one of the
leading experts on pirates,
historian David Cordingly,
Roberts' pirates, quote,
"hoisted up Spanish
colors and continued them
till they drew near the sloop.
Then they haul them down,
hoisted their black flag,
fired a broadside,
and boarded her."
This shows an important feature
of the classic false flag.
Before engaging the enemy,
the true pirate flag
would be raised and
the intended target
would then know who
they were dealing with.
In other words, the false flag
was used to lure the victim,
but once the true action
began, the pirates always
revealed their identity.
There were two main
reasons for this.
First, it was simply considered
wrong, even perfidious,
for a pirate vessel
to engage its victim
while carrying false colors.
Yes, there was a code of honor.
But even more
important, was the fact
that the pirate flag was itself
an effective weapon, almost
always striking fear into
the hearts of men on board
the target vessel.
Generally speaking
though, pirates
did not feel the need
to use false flags.
Generally, they had superior
firepower and more men
than most other vessels,
certainly more than merchant
ships.
And they were quite
confident in their ability
to overwhelm their prey.
Their terrifying
reputation was a bonus.
There are a few known
examples of false colors
being used by the US Navy
in its early history.
Although these are
certainly not false flags
in the classic sense,
as much as they
are simply examples of clever
disguise being used in warfare.
One is the story of the
vessel the USS Revenge
from the American Revolution.
Already by 1777,
American cruisers
were across the
Atlantic Ocean, trying
to carry the war to the British.
One of them, the Revenge,
under the command
of Gustavus Conyngham,
captured or burned a number
of smaller British
vessels in British waters.
One in desperate need
of refitting, Conyngham
boldly led his vessel into
a British port in disguise.
The ship was refit and
repaired in a British harbor,
and then left unmolested to
continue carrying on warfare
against the United Kingdom.
In 1803, during the
Napoleonic Wars,
the American frigate
Philadelphia ran on the rocks
in the harbor of
Tripoli, and was
captured by the people
there, the Libyans.
The Americans determined
to destroy her.
Stephen Decatur sailed into the
harbor with a volunteer crew,
in a little vessel
disguised as a fishing boat.
The Libyans allowed
the Americans
to come close, whereupon
the Americans boarded
the Philadelphia, drove off the
crew, set the vessel on fire,
and escaped.
>> Decatur stayed
until the last minute,
and was the last American to
leave the burning frigate.
This daring action
deep in enemy territory
proved Americans had the will
to defend themselves and meet
threats to the nation
anywhere, a fighting tradition
upheld by our sailors and
special operators today.
>> These accounts of audacity
and guile can't truly be
considered false flags,
but discussing them here is
instructive.
Both of the cases relating
to the early American
Navy, or even the events of the
pirates of that era, the use
of false flags was only intended
to lure a targeted enemy
into a false sense
of security in order
to accomplish a specific goal.
But these types of false
flags were always considered
to be a temporary expedient.
That is, once you no longer
need to fool your enemy,
it was perfectly reasonable
to reveal your identity.
The irony about the
phrase false flag then,
is that none of the few
examples of false flag
operations from
the 18th century,
would really qualify
as false flags today.
The perpetrators were too
honest, even the pirates.
That time period did
have one event, for sure,
that absolutely qualifies as
a true, genuine false flag.
It happened in the year 1788, by
the government of, wait for it,
Sweden.
Who knew?
King Gustav III of Sweden
was an unpopular autocrat.
Pretty much everyone was sick
of him, especially the nobility.
Russia, Sweden's main
rival, was openly
supporting his
political opponents,
and Gustav concluded that war
was only a matter of time.
He also believed,
like many rulers
before and after him,
that a short little war
would make him more popular.
His problem was that,
despite being an autocrat,
he still needed the parliament
to help declare war.
He couldn't do it alone.
Another interesting
aspect to this situation
was that, just as today,
the major western powers,
in this case Great Britain,
the Dutch Republic,
and the kingdom of
Prussia, basically Germany,
were afraid of Russian power.
Back then, Russia was
at war with Turkey
and doing very well.
So the idea was that a war
in the north with Russia
would divert Russian
attention from its war
in the south with Turkey.
All very complex.
So these three nations
whispered to Gustav
to make an alliance with Turkey,
Russia's enemy, which he did.
So now Gustav planned for war.
The problem was that war was not
a popular idea in Sweden, not
even among Swedish
generals and officers,
who were not happy
with their king.
First, he tried
to provoke a war.
In June of 1788,
the Swedish fleet
encountered a Russian
squadron in the Baltic Sea.
They chased the
Russians down and nearly
started a war then and there,
but the Russian commander
very intelligently and
diplomatically avoided
a conflict, and the
Swedes left empty-handed.
That's when the Swedes initiated
their false flag operation.
A head tailor of the
royal Swedish opera
received an order to sew a
number of Russian Cossack
uniforms.
With these uniforms, the
Swedes staged an attack
on June 27, 1788, at the small
Swedish outpost of Puumala,
near the Russian border.
This is actually
part of Finland,
But Sweden had controlled
Finland for centuries.
The fakery did not work
perfectly, by the way.
Several of the king's critics
learned of the costume story
and declared that the war
was illegal, which it was.
But their voices
were drowned out
by the indignation and
outrage in Stockholm
and the rest of the nation.
Gustav always sought to have as
strict control over newspapers
as possible, and they
covered the outbreak of war
just as he wanted.
Overall, the false flag worked.
It was enough to
convince the parliament
to allow Gustav to declare
a so-called defensive war
on Russia.
Unfortunately for Sweden,
and certainly for Gustav,
the war turned out to be
a very costly mistake.
It lasted for three years
and Sweden was the big loser.
The initial public support
for the war didn't last long.
About 22,000 Swedish
soldiers died.
The Finns hatched
their own conspiracy
to create an independent Finnish
state, with Russian support.
The nobility's hatred of
Gustav only increased.
And he was assassinated in 1792.
But guess what?
In a larger sense,
the false flag
did work quite well,
if not for the Swedes,
than for the western powers
who stood behind Sweden.
I mean, Britain, the Dutch
Republic, and Prussia.
Because a Swedish
war with Russia did
divert Russian plans to send
its Navy into the Mediterranean.
In other words,
the war with Sweden
did serve the interests
of the Western powers.
Ultimately, it didn't
matter very much.
The Russians eventually
defeated the Turks anyway.
And then, of course,
Napoleon soon overshadowed
everything going on in Europe,
and pretty much redrew the map.
Yet, the Swedish false flag of
1788 is a fascinating study.
Its purpose was to generate
domestic and diplomatic support
for a war that had
no justification,
but which served the interests
of a small clique in Sweden
and abroad.
There were multiple
layers of deception here,
one by the Swedish government,
another in the form of strings
being pulled by foreign powers.
By the 20th and 21st
centuries, such multiple layers
of deception would
develop into an art form.
>> When Hitler lashed
out at Poland in 1939,
the German people followed
him into war without regrets.
This was the day
Germany had been
building for and waiting for.
And with larceny
in their hearts,
they gloried in the destruction
they were letting loose
upon the world.
>> Sometimes facing the truth
can be uncomfortable at first.
After a little while
at it, however, you
will inevitably feel stronger.
Literally empowered.
Why is that?
Well, think back to anytime
in your life when you
had an illusion stripped away.
It was painful at first,
but ultimately you
were glad you learned the truth.
Because the truth
does set us free.
Reaching the truth means
stripping away the illusions
around us, so don't despair.
Just wake up.
I'm Richard Dolan.
Join me next time
on False Flags when
we look at three fascinating
acts of deception.
The sinking of
the Maine of 1898,
the financial scare of 1907,
and the sinking of the Lusitania
in 1915.
Welcome to the modern
age of deception.